# MA2219 Project
import { BigSpace, Space } from '../../../src/components/Mdx'

## Things that don't make sense in projective geometry

These are theorems that do not hold true across all projections. In
each of the theorems covered, I will be providing an example of a case
where the theorem doesn't hold after a projection, followed by a
commentary on its applicability in affine geometry.

### Varignon's Theorem

![varignon](/geometry/varignon.png)

<Space/>

Let the blue points and lines denote a picture of Varignon's Theorem
on the plane $z = 1$, and let the orange points and lines be their
projection onto the plane $x + z = \tf{3}{2}$.

With this projection we can observe two things:

1. **Collinearity is preserved.** If three points are collinear before
   the projection, then they will remain collinear after the
   projection.
2. **Midpoints are not preserved.** Consider side $RS$ and its
   midpoint $C$. After the projection, it's clear that $C'$ is no
   longer the midpoint of $R'S'$.
3. **Parallel lines are not preserved.** Before the projection,
   $AB\parallel CD$, but $A'B' \not\parallel
   C'D'$.

In affine geometry, all three mentioned parameters are preserved.
Hence, under all affine transformations, parallelogram $ABCD$ should
always be mapped to a new parallelogram $A'B'C'D'$.

Since midpoints are preserved, $A'$ should remain the midpoint of $P'$
and $Q'$, as with the other three sets of points. So the original four
points in general position $P$, $Q$, $R$, and $S$ will be mapped to a
new four points in general position where their midpoints still
correspond.

Since the picture remains valid and the parallelogram is still
present, Varignon's Theorem holds in affine geometry.

<BigSpace />

### Steiner-Lehmus Theorem

![menelaus](/geometry/steiner-lehmus.png)

Again, let the blue features be a picture of the Steiner-Lehmus
theorem on the $z = 1$ plane, and let the orange features be that
picture projected onto the $x+y+z=2$ plane.

With this projection, we can observe two additional properties of
projection:

1. **angles are not preserved.** E lies inside of AB but E' lies
   outside of A'B'. So $\a{ACB} > \a{ECB}$ (2 times, to be exact,
   since the blue picture is a construction of the Steiner-Lehmus
   theorem.) but $\a{A'C'B'} < \a{E'C'B'}$. So clearly at least one of
   the angles changed after the projection.
2. **ratios of non-collinear lengths are not preserved.** $AB = AC$
   but $A'B' \neq A'C'$.

With these properties of projection, isoceles triangles and angle
bisectors are not preserved either. Hence the Steiner-Lehmus theorem
doesn't hold after a projection.

This theorem doesn't hold in affine geometry because affine
transformations do not preserve angles. (take for example the skew
transformation)

## Things that makes sense in projective geometry

So far, there are a few properties that have been seen to be preserved
under projections:

1. **collinearity.** If $A$, $B$, $C$ are collinear, then their
   projections $A'$, $B'$, $C'$ will be collinear too.
2. **concurrence.** If lines $AB$ and $CD$ meet at $E$, then their
   projections $A'B'$ and $C'D'$ will meet at the projection of $E$,
   that is $E'$.

I will be proving that these two properties hold under all
transformations in the projective space, and after that I will list
two theorems which only comment on these properties. If the theorems
only concern properties that are projective invariant, they should
hold under all projections.

Before continuing, we establish some standardized notation for the
following statements.

1. A projective point is a line in $\R^3$ that passes through the
   origin. If $A$ is a projective point then there exists
   $\mathbf{v}\in\R^3 \setminus \{0\}$ such that $A$ is on the line in
   $\R^3$ that passes through $\mathbf{0}$ and $\mathbf{v}$. Thus, we
   can define $\pi : \R^3 \setminus \{0\} \to \mathbb{P}^2$ as follows:
   $\pi(\mathbf{v})$ is the projective point through $\mathbf{0}$ and
   $\mathbf{v}$.
2. The projective plane $\mathbb{P}^2$ is the set of all projective
   points.
3. A projective line is a plane in $\R^3$ that passes through the
   origin. Given two projective points $A$ and $B$ there exists a
   unique projective line $r$ such that $A$ and $B$ lie on $r$. Let
   such a projective line be denoted by $\mathcal{L}(A,B)$.

### Proof that collinearity is projective invariant

Let $\newcommand\pp[2]{#1(\mathbf{#2})}\pp{\pi}{u}$, $\pp{\pi}{v}$,
$\pp{\pi}{w}$ be three collinear points on the projective plane. Then
those points and the vectors $\mathbf{u}$, $\mathbf{v}$, and
$\mathbf{w}$ will also lie on a plane $\omega$ which passes through
the origin.

Consider a new plane $\pi'$ that these three points will be projected
on. $w$ will meet $\pi'$ at a line (possibly at infinity). Since the
projections of $\pp{\pi}{u}$, $\pp{\pi}{v}$, and $\pp{\pi}{w}$ will
lie on this new line of intersection, their projections will be
collinear again.

### Proof that concurrence is projective invariant

Let $\mathcal{L}(A,B)$ intersect $\mathcal{L}(C,D)$ at point $M$ on
the projective plane $\pi$. Then there are two sets of collinear
points: $\{A, B, M\}$ and $\{C, D, M\}$. Let the projection onto a new
plane $\pi'$ of an arbitrary point $X$ on $\pi$ be denoted by $X'$.

Since collinearity is projective-invariant, we have two new sets of
collinear points on $\pi'$: $\{A', B', M'\}$ and $\{C', D', M'\}$. And
so clearly, $\mathcal{L}(A',B')$ intersects $\mathcal{L}(C', D')$ at
$M'$. So the intersection of the projection of lines
$\mathcal{L}(A,B)$ and $\mathcal{L}(C,D)$ is the same as the
projection of their intersection.

Thus concurrence is projective-invariant.

### Theorems which only concern collinearity and concurrence

Desargues' theorem and Pappus' theorem only make statements about
collinearity and concurrences, and thus both hold after projections.
